---
layout: post
title: "Hello from MathILy-Er!"
---

Here's a blog post from Willamette University at Salem, Oregon! I'm currently at
[MathILy-Er](http://www.mathily.org/mathilyer/) (which, in a manner typical of
the general MathILy-Er environment, stands for "serious mathematics infused with
levity, earlier"), a five-week intensive summer mathematics program, of which
the second week is just getting over. MathILy-Er has a very different
[philosophy](http://www.mathily.org/why.html) from many other summer math
'camps'---the distinction between 'camp' and 'program' is apparently a
significant one, at least technically---and follows a very free and open
approach in letting students discover mathematics as they explore and toy
around. In fact, there are no lectures, no individual problem sets, no spans of
time in which only one person speaks for more than five minutes, and no
textbooks or external resources. We collectively do mathematics with prods from
the instructors just like real-world free markets don't find optimal
equilibriums without appropriate 'prods' from the government. (Bad analogy, I
know.) Yes, you guessed it, this is yet another instance of that discovery-based
education thing that I keep talking about, and no, this is not the blog post in
which I go into it at length. I promise I will at some point.

I'm certainly enjoying MathILy-Er with 44 hours of math and at least 13 hours of
table tennis/Frisbee/board games/card games/... every week; we're just finishing
the so-called "Root Class" which lets us brush up our collaboration and
proof-writing skills and introduces us to key concepts we will use later in more
specific and in-depth "Chaos" and "Branch" classes in the following weeks.
MathILy-Er focuses to a large extent on discrete mathematics, so Root covered
basic graph theory, game theory, combinatorial counting (fun stuff), and the
likes; some Chaos classes I might take are "Markov Chains", "A Tour of Turing",
and "Cayley graphs" (whatever those are). Apart from math, significant things I
have learned include
[forehand-throwing a Frisbee](http://ultimatefrisbeehq.com/how-to-throw-a-forehand-frisbee/),
the basics of [SageMath](http://www.sagemath.org/),
[meditation on homotopy embedding](https://vk.com/video-9666747_142799479),
and the frustrations of customer care (a story I will narrate in a few days).

Interesting coincidence about SageMath: a few weeks before MathILy-Er,
[USAMTS](http://usamts.org/) finally started with the prizes, and since I had
won bronze this year, I was eligible for two books of my selection from their
catalog, the annual USAMTS T-shirt, and one-year subscriptions to
[Mathematica](http://www.wolfram.com/mathematica/) and
[WolframAlpha Pro](http://www.wolframalpha.com/pro/). (As you might have
guessed, Wolfram Research is a USAMTS sponsor.) The latter two prizes are pretty
heavy prizes for high-schoolers in my opinion; at least I don't really know how
to effectively use my one-year subscription, though I have some idea thanks to
the [ever-helpful](https://math.stackexchange.com/q/2307623/140607) Math.SE
community. Anyway, so I downloaded and installed Mathematica---a hefty 6
GB---only to find that MathILy-Er recommended that we bring *Sage* to the
program---another 5 GB *&lt;sigh&gt;*. Fortunately Sage can leach off
Mathematica by passing objects to the Mathematica kernel through Sage and
returning the results, so I'm not being terribly inconvenienced. Although I
don't really need such powerful mathematical tools, at least not yet. Small
ironies.

I'll probably write a few more times from MathILy-Er, and then I'll be heading
to Dublin, Ireland, for [IOL 2017](http://www.iol2017.ie/) with almost no gap in
between. I would have loved to write about my linguistics preparation in as much
depth as I can about other things but most of it is internal team
material---tests, designed problems, and the like---so I'll have to abstain and
hope that I don't come across as slacking off in the face of an international
event (really, I *am* preparing). That's all for now!
