---
layout: post
title: "Sorry I'm Rambling Again"
---

A few years ago I read ["Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman!"][1] and while that
book instantly made Feynman one of my top role models, it also got me thinking
about many things, including how dreams work. I'm not a [lucid dreamer][2] and I
haven't had much success in my short-lived attempts, so it's not so much
*thinking* about dreams as just *observing* what happens as I'm falling asleep
and immediately after I wake up and remember a dream. The most interesting
observation so far? As I'm on the brink of sleep, my internal narrative begins
to ramble.

By default, it sounds like something from Aesop's Fables. "And then the donkey
said to the man, 'Why don't we go to the city tomorrow?' The cow saw that this
was not a very smart idea. Rama thought, 'Certainly it is so.' ..." If I've been
reading a novel (particularly a well-written one), then there's often a clear
influence from it on the prose style. I recall once rambling a series of texts
exchanged between me and a friend. A few days ago I 'rambled' a Wikipedia page,
internal narrative combined with a visual hallucination of sorts of a subsection
heading, paragraphs of text, an image with a caption, and so on. What's constant
in all of these is that the flow of the words sounds incredibly natural and
smooth but there is no significant meaning whatsoever.

(Disclaimer: these are the ones I remember, which may not be representative of
the actual distribution, and the true 'default' in particular might be something
else entirely that I have no clue about. It isn't relevant to this post though.)

Let me clarify that this isn't the same as daydreaming. When I'm daydreaming,
the events make sense, form a story, are plausible in the real world: "She'll
walk up to me and smile and say, 'Wanna dance?' And I'll take her hand and we'll
waltz perfectly, and when the music ends she'll wrap her arms around my neck
and" okay anyway the events make sense and form a story. Also, I'm aware that
I'm daydreaming, and I imagine the things *I want to* (as a self-aware sentient
being); when rambling, a few seconds after I become aware of the fact, it stops,
and whatever meaning I remember from the narrative seems incoherent and random
to *me* (the self-aware sentient being that actually worries about meaning).

So, what's going on? Scott Alexander does a very good job of [connecting][5]
this to a recent breakthrough in computational language models: OpenAI's
[GPT-2 samples][3] that are uncannily similar to my dream-rambling (actually
they sometimes make more sense than I do). Please read Scott's blog post; it is
vastly superior to my summary/paraphrase in the rest of this paragraph.
Essentially, a language model like GPT-2 is a system that takes in some history,
such as the beginning of a sentence, and predicts the future, such as the next
word in the sentence. To be precise, rather than predicting the next word per se
it produces a probability distribution over possibilities for the next word
based on what it has seen in its training data, which means it can also be used
to generate language by choosing from its own predictions. This is a pretty good
approximation of how humans do language most of the time, too, as Robin Hanson
[writes about][4] (including speculation about the consequences of GPT-2-like
machines two years before it happened) and as [explained][8] by Scott in a
review of a book presenting a beautiful neuroscience theory about how a brain is
really a large prediction machine whose models of the world are affected by the
senses but whose inputs are also greatly distorted to fit its models. So if you
take a human brain detached from sensory input (such as a sleeping human brain)
and run its language model generatively, &hellip;

This is slightly scary. A machine that can produce the same or better quality
natural language compared to a almost-asleep human? What next, Alexa
[whispering into my ear as I fall asleep][10] to give me an inexplicable urge
to shop on Amazon the next morning? And there's also the fact that while GPT-2's
musings don't actually make sense, it takes careful reading to discover this,
because if you just skim it flows like normal natural text. To quote from a
[blog post][7] by Sarah Constantin on this very topic, "OpenAI HAS achieved the
ability to pass the Turing test against humans on autopilot." I agree
wholeheartedly when she mentions how hard it is to stay focused on reading a
GPT-2 sample, without slipping into skimming mode. I find it literally
impossible. I cannot say with any confidence that I have entirely *read* any of
the GPT-2 samples. Both Sarah and Robin from the previous paragraph write about
how social norms might change given that this level of machine intelligence is
possible, so that humans can signal that they are in fact not bots, other humans
can catch the presence or absence of these cues in ways the bots can't, etc. but
I think this is mostly optimistic. In my unqualified opinion, more likely
scenarios include spammy Wikipedia edits that are extremely hard to catch, fake
news that seems very much like real news unless you take the effort yourself to
fact-search online, and copypasta that's somehow, uh, superior to existing ones?

But this is greatly exciting too. I think it's really interesting how advances
in machine learning and results from neural networks of increasing complexity
are starting to tell us more about the original biological neuron-based brains
they are modeled after. For example, researchers recently [found][9] that they
could construct visual stimuli that activate specific visual neurons far beyond
what natural stimuli would do, by working an image-recognition neural network
'in reverse'/generatively. Or the study (that I can't find a link to but I heard
about in my human brain class last semester) that found number neurons (neurons
in animal brains that fire when there are exactly/approximately X objects in an
image) develop in an image-classifier network even without any number tasks during training. Or
a machine learning paradigm called a Boltzmann machine that [explains dreams][6]
(Scott links to this page too, and the page says, "Unfortunately the Boltzmann
Machine can only be understood by using Math. So you’ll like it if you know math
too."). I used to doubt that machine learning buzzwords would ever be
significant in the broader goal of understanding and creating intelligence,
because they seem like mere applications of a few statistical principles, but
hey, if intelligence itself is the generalized application of a few statistical
principles then I'm starting to change my mind.

Please can I machine-learn machine learning before the machines machine-learn me
thanks. [Coursera][11] here I come.


 [1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surely_You're_Joking,_Mr._Feynman!
 [2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucid_dream
 [3]: https://openai.com/blog/better-language-models/#samples
 [4]: http://www.overcomingbias.com/2017/03/better-babblers.html
 [5]: https://slatestarcodex.com/2019/02/18/do-neural-nets-dream-of-electric-hobbits/
 [6]: https://theneural.wordpress.com/2011/07/08/the-miracle-of-the-boltzmann-machine/
 [7]: https://srconstantin.wordpress.com/2019/02/25/humans-who-are-not-concentrating-are-not-general-intelligences/
 [8]: https://slatestarcodex.com/2017/09/05/book-review-surfing-uncertainty/
 [9]: http://news.mit.edu/2019/computer-model-brain-visual-cortex-0502
 [10]: https://engineeringdreams.net/
 [11]: https://www.coursera.org/browse/data-science/machine-learning
