---
layout: post
title: "A Raag is a Language"
author: Shardul
---

The concept of a _raag_ in Hindustani classical music seems a lot like a
language to me. I'm going to try to explain what a raag is from this perspective
and see how much sense the analogy makes.

(Fun fact: this idea was first mentioned to me by my dad, a few years ago, when
I was first reading Douglas Hofstadter's [GÃ¶del, Escher, Bach][1] and excitedly
explaining to him the mathematical patterns in a Bach piece. He said, "Can't you
describe similar rules and patterns in the notes of a raag?", of which I was
instantly skeptical because what else is the expected attitude of an adolescent
boy towards an insightful comment by his father? Anyway, I think it is very true
now, and was reminded of it when giving Rujul an impromptu lesson about the
seasonal suitability of various raags.)

(Quick notation primer: Hindustani Classical Music (HCM) is based on relative
pitch, with a movable tonic/'do'. The basic solfege syllables are _sa re ga ma
pa dha ni_ essentially corresponding to _do re mi fa sol la ti_, and I will also
refer to them as [degrees][2] of the scale. Another important note is that
almost all melodic HCM instruments are continuous-pitch (in the hands of a good
performer), especially the ones in a solo performance, even ones like the flute
that don't seem like it.)

Let's start with phonetics. The entire space of possible raags covers only
12&nbsp;basic phones, the 12&nbsp;notes of the chromatic scale; the phonemes of
any particular raag are a subset of these. To make this a little more accurate
to reality, consider that different raags can use different microtones of the
same note, giving more than 12&nbsp;phones, but there is never a contrast or
minimal pair between microtones of the _same_ note in a single raag so we can
consider that note (regardless of microtonal variation) to be a phoneme. This
situation is not that different from natural language. There are considerably
many more phonemes in a language and many more phones in general, but a language
uses a subset of all possible phones, and those phonemes can have 'microtones'
(e.g. aspiration allophony, velarized articulation, etc.) that are not
contrastive in a single language.

Phonology (the interactions between phonemes strung together) and morphology
(the interactions between word roots and affixes that form an entire word)
overlap in a kind of messy way when it comes to raags, because there are no
'words' really. Nevertheless I think there are some interesting observations.
When a performer moves from one note to the next, it is of course not an
instantaneous change, because of the physical properties of their voice or
instrument. But that brief, almost unnoticeable period between two notes is not
outside the control of the performer; in fact, the type of transition between
two notes often defines the nature of a raag, and a raag can have different
preferred transitions for different pairs of notes. The transition can be a
smooth ease-in-ease-out, or have a lilt at the beginning or end, or hit a very
brief grace note en route, or a number of other possibilities. (For those
familiar with HCM, a simple example: consider the difference between the
_dha_ to _sa_ transitions in _Yaman_ and _Bhoop_!) This does not have an
obvious counterpart in natural language, but I think that it is reminiscent of
the sort of phonological/morphological changes that occur at phoneme/morpheme
boundaries. In the transition from the root 'box' to the suffix 's' (plural),
say, there is a 'grace note' that makes you say 'boxes' with a schwa in the
middle and not 'boxs'.

There is a more straightforward correspondence at the syntax (grammar) level.
Every novice HCM student starts learning a raag by learning its _aaroha_ and
_avaroha_, which are a generally ascending and generally descending sequence of
some of the notes of the raag, respectively, that start and end around the tonic
(_sa_) in the appropriate octave. If one is currently singing/playing a note,
then the next note can be any note above it in the aaroha or any note below it
in the avaroha, such that any valid sequence of notes can be broken into
ascending sections agreeing with the aaroha and descending sections agreeing
with the avaroha. This is quite literally a grammar that specifies which 'words'
can be used in what order to form a sentence! A realization or instance of a
raag is comprised of valid sentences drawn from an infinite space, exactly how
the 'formal' description of a language's syntax is realized into an actual
sentence that obeys it. And just like real grammars, the aaroha and avaroha can
have context-dependent rules that specify patterns of notes that must be
followed, such as 'if a phrase ends in the tonic, it almost always must do so
with the degree sequence 3-4-2-1 (_ga ma re sa_)'. There is some intersection
here with morphology, because the rules also often specify what sort of
transitions are to be used in certain phrases, but then again there is
considerable interaction between morphology and syntax in natural languages too.

Finally, we come to semantics and pragmatics. Whether or not a musical phrase
produced in the framework of a raag has any meaning is contentious, but there
are certainly meta-rules for realizing a raag in the broader context of a
performance. For instance, every raag has two special notes called the _vaadi_
and the _samvaadi_, that are intended to be the primary and secondary focuses
(respectively) of phrases in the raag. This doesn't mean that every phrase must
use those notes more often than other notes, and nor does this mean that a
section of a performance cannot focus on a different note, but the performance
as a whole must show a clear emphasis on the vaadi and a less prominent emphasis
on the samvaadi over other notes. Another example is the set of idioms of a
raag, phrases or smaller note sequences that appear much more frequently than
average, and are often building blocks of larger sentences. Again, it is not the
case that every phrase must use these idioms, but if they aren't used frequently
enough then the raag does not 'sound correct' to most listeners even if the
grammar is technically being followed. (Interestingly, these idiomatic phrases
vary between _gharanas_ or guilds of musicians, just like dialects!) My last
example here is the case of _mishra_ or hybrid raags. If raag&nbsp;A and
raag&nbsp;B are in a hybrid, then the performer can switch between a mode in
which they realize phrases of raag A and a mode for raag B, _but_ the switching
can only happen in certain contexts (e.g. usually not in the middle of an
idiomatic phrase); it must be seamless, in the sense that the switch should flow
naturally and appear effortless; and both raags' rules are slightly modified
from the versions that would be used for performing purely raag&nbsp;A or B
(e.g. maybe using raag&nbsp;A below the dominant (_pa_) and raag&nbsp;B above).
The linguistic counterpart that immediately comes to mind here is
[code-switching][3] which has many similar phenomena.

(Warning: another cognitive science reference incoming!) I am now reminded of
the units about music and language processing in my [Human Brain][4] class last
semester. Briefly speaking, the music and language processing pathways are the
same for many initial perceptive processes like determining how fast and in
which direction pitch is changing, detecting harmonics and the relationships
between them, etc., but then the two pathways diverge for higher-level functions
specific to language or music that are selectively activated for those stimuli.
If the subject listens to songs with lyrics then both are activated. (If I
remember correctly, there are also regions that respond selectively to human
voices, and it is unclear how these tie into language and music.) However, this
research has all been conducted using Western musical frameworks; would the
results change with HCM?

In particular, I'm thinking of how my approach to learning a raag changed once I
was no longer a novice HCM student. For me---and I believe for most people with
more than just basic training in HCM---figuring out which notes a raag uses, and
the transitions between them, requires perhaps 15 to 30&nbsp;seconds of
listening to a performance. Within a few minutes, the aaroha, avaroha, and many
of the finer morphological rules are reasonably clear. I'd say 30&nbsp;minutes
is almost always sufficient to have a pretty good grasp of the pragmatics of
various idioms and such, but to be able to perform something that 'sounds
correct', I'd have to attentively listen to at least a couple complete
performances. Importantly, most of this learning process is _unconscious_,
because things like phonological and grammatical rules are picked up naturally
just by listening to the performer, and even in an instructional setting the
most effective way to convey them is having students learn by example. I don't
believe anyone ever actually talks about the various types of transitions
between notes; it's just something you pick up as you get better. This sounds
suspiciously similar to learning a language! No amount of theoretical grammar
can make a language learner's sentences flow naturally.

All I need now is access to an fMRI machine (technician included), a few dozen
experimental subjects (half of them trained in HCM), an undergraduate research
assistant to clean up the data and run the statistics I specify, and some
departmental funding. Should be an easy road to publication after that.



  [1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%B6del%2C_Escher%2C_Bach
  [2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Degree_%28music%29
  [3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code-switching
  [4]: http://student.mit.edu/catalog/m9a.html#9.13
