---
layout: post
title: "Glass is Weird"
---

This semester, I was lucky to get into MIT's beginner [glassblowing class][1],
described as "the single most over-subscribed activity at MIT" because there are
over 300 students vying for 20 randomly-selected spots. Their lottery system
makes you n&nbsp;times more likely to get in if this is your nth attempt
(compared to a first-time entrant), so I was surprised to be picked the second
term I tried, to the despair of some of my older friends who'd watched many
excited faces get in for seven semesters, but never their own... (On the other
hand, a friend told me that her name was the first pick in her freshman fall. "I
was like, that's it, I've exhausted my good luck for all four years at MIT.")

Glassblowing is a difficult art. By the end of the class I was able to make
pieces like these (with guidance from the instructors):

![ribcup][2]

![vase][3]

They look like normal glass objects! A success, because many of my earlier works
were misshapen creatures whose best function would be as a paperweight.
(Although I did make an actual paperweight too, pictured.)

<img class="right-inset" src="https://i.imgur.com/jrXTptH.jpg"/>
Before coming to MIT, I'd never been interested in "maker"-y things, apart from
playing around with digital electronics (but that mainly came from my interest
in understanding logic circuits and programming microcontrollers). The Glass Lab
was my first true maker experience. I never imagined myself in MIT's lower
dungeons, with my sleeves rolled up, sweating beside a 2000&nbsp;Â°C furnace as I
squeezed molten glass into practical shapes---but I guess MIT seeps into you
like that after a few semesters.

I won't try to explain the process of glassblowing because (i)&nbsp;I'm sure
it's been explained better elsewhere by someone who knows what they're doing and
(ii)&nbsp;I quickly realized that it's very hard to explain physical processes
like blowing glass without visuals (actual lab space, or videos, or making funny
hand shapes, etc., none of which are particularly suited to a blog post). But
one my main takeaways from the class was that glass is _weird_. Glass is
_counter-intuitive_. It is unlike any substance you deal with in ordinary life
and it makes your cognitive physics engines sputter and choke, until (ah the
wonders of the brain) you relearn how glass behaves as a fluid through direct
experience.

Picture this: you reach into the furnace and pick up a glob of molten glass on
the end of a pipe. It's not a dip or a swirl but rather, you rotate the pipe to
make glass catch on to it (because it's a very viscous fluid); the faster you
rotate, the more glass you can pick up, _but_ if you rotate too fast then
centrifugal force will turn your glob of glass into a hard-to-work-with mushroom
instead of the more ideal egg shape.

Now you're bringing the pipe out of the furnace but oops, you drag along a thin
trail of glass, like the trail from honey. It sticks to the sill and...
instantly becomes a solid wire that you can snap off with your foot. (It's still
hot, but not molten, because it cools very fast with a large surface area but
small mass.) Similarly, if you hold the pipe straight down, glass will droop off
the end and make a puddle on the floor... which can be lifted straight back up
as a slightly soft, puddle-shaped piece of glass with a very flat bottom. (Do
not try this at home because the lab floor is specially made to handle these
high amounts of heat. (I don't know why you'd be trying glassblowing at home
anyway.)) Touching metal tools to glass also dramatically cools it and makes it
change its properties faster than you'd expect. However, the most extreme
example of cooling would be the process known as "breaking off": when you want
to take your work off the pipe, you make a constriction where you want it to
break and then pour a few drops of water at the joint, delivering a thermal
shock that produces many small cracks going through the joint. At this point,
giving a sharp tap to the pipe makes the piece fall off.

<img class="right-inset" src="https://i.pinimg.com/236x/24/cb/d5/24cbd58e49cee02d984f52a7013c810b.jpg"/>
Let's try heating. If you have a blown-out glass surface surrounding a hollow
interior, as expected, it heats up quicker than solid glass. This can be
problematic if you heat a thin surface too much, as it starts becoming more
fluid until... surface tension pulls the surface in and it begins to fold and/or
scrunch up like a plastic bottle when you suck the air out. This totally freaked
me out the first time I saw it. Sadly I don't have a picture of my own, although
this is something close I found online. Sometimes, you can use this to your
advantage, for example by making the lip of a bowl extremely hot and then giving
your pipe a good downwards flick to create a perfectly symmetric "handkerchief"
ripple. But these surface features and other texture details tend to smooth out
if you're not careful to limit the heat.

Speaking of thin surfaces, a mishap we were warned against was blowing a surface
too thin to the point where it turns into wispy cellophane-like pieces, floats
into the air, and gives you a good deal of respiratory trouble. If I had
pictures for this one I'm not sure I'd be able to share them.

Lastly, tool usage. Most of the tools we used were straightforward: tweezers can
grab and lengthen the piece, or draw out bumps/wires, or make dents; the jacks
can constrict and expand sections of the piece; wet wooden paddles and blocks
can shape the piece, sizzling on contact with the glass but not burning. Shears
on the other hand can _cut_ through glass with a satisfying _soft crunch_!
(It's surprisingly more satisfying than cutting through paper.) It has to be
just the right temperature and you have to work fast to keep it that way, as too
high means the glass just sticks to the shears in blobs and too low means it's
too solid to work at all.

I now see why the Glass Lab is under the materials science department. There's
much more to glass than just the craftsmanship and glassblowing-as-art: [glass][4] is
a very interesting _material_ that humans have been exploring for many centuries
in various forms. Everything I described above was just basic observations about
standard transparent glass, and things get complex when you work with colors,
patterned sheets, pieces assembled from separate parts, ... talking to the
instructors it was clear that they'd developed detailed intuitions about what
you can do with glass and how, that were just as much scientific as artistic.

A parting note: perhaps what's weirder than glass is the annual MIT glass
pumpkin sale, called [The Great Glass Pumpkin Patch][5]. At face value this
sounds like a very normal thing. Glass lab students and instructors make glass
pumpkins by hand (see the link for pictures), put them on display, visitors
purchase them. Reading the description, however, you notice that "Saturday
morning line-placeholder ticket distribution begins when the lab director
arrives (usually around 6&nbsp;AM)" and "Proceeds from the MIT Great Glass
Pumpkin Patch cover 100% of the annual operating expenses of the MIT Glass Lab".
A little strange, isn't it, that the distribution of tickets that _mark your
place in line_ to enter the exhibition starts around 6&nbsp;AM on a Saturday,
and sales from the event cover the _entire year's expenses_ of the lab, given
that renting time in a similar glass lab is usually $50 or more per hour?

According to a friend of mine who went last year, the truth is that the event is
stuffed with extremely rich and obnoxious parents, spouses, etc. of MIT
affiliates, who start lining up well before 4&nbsp;AM to enter the Pumpkin
Patch. Their sole aim is to be the first to rush in and buy a handful of the
most ridiculously expensive pumpkins (several hundred dollars each) regardless
of the actual aesthetics of the piece. They bicker over their position in line;
they get upset when someone else takes a piece they were eyeing; they casually
mention, "Oh, I have twenty of these at home, this will be a perfect addition to
my collection". My friend couldn't make sense of it and neither can I. I guess
it's some consolation that if I ever make a glass pumpkin, no matter how it
turns out (perhaps I'll have to rename it as a decorative gourd?), I could get a
little extra cash from a benevolent patron.


  [1]: http://glasslab.scripts.mit.edu/classes/
  [2]: https://i.imgur.com/pmC0QPu.jpg
  [3]: https://i.imgur.com/WK6oQDj.jpg
  [4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glass
  [5]: http://glasslab.scripts.mit.edu/pumpkin/
