---
layout: post
title: "An Abundance of Mangoes"
author: Shardul
---

*(Note: I wrote this over a year ago on a different blog. Cross-posting now
because why not.)*

In a world far away from the dorm where I am usually seen, I am drowning in an
abundance of mangoes. Mangoes to eat whole, mangoes to eat sliced, mangoes to
slurp as pulp, mango jam, mango pickle, dried mango, mango even to flavor other
dishes that can do perfectly well without it. You might think one gets tired of
mangoes at some point, but not me, because it's been four years since I was last
in India's mango country in the mango season—Goa in the summer.

Goa is a small state on the western coast of India, whose red soil, black
volcanic bedrock, warm and humid climate, and simple vacation-loving people make
for very special mangoes. I keep saying "mango" in the generic but really there
are dozens of varieties that are as similar as oranges and nectarines. There's
the world-renowned king-of-the-mangoes alphonso, or *hapus*, that considers
itself too special to sprout from a seed and hence must be grown from a graft,
under very careful environmental conditions, to produce a large, delicate,
sweet, thin-skinned fruit. The geographical origin of a hapus mango is an
important topic for connoisseurs and can be the reason for a three-fold
difference in price. There's the *paayri* that naturally lends itself to pulp:
it's small and soft and not too sweet, but when pulped, it keeps its fibers to
itself and away from the gaps between your teeth. There's the *keshar* with a
bright orange color (*keshar* literally means 'saffron'), the robust
thick-skinned *totapuri*, and many other local varieties that rarely reach a
large market.

My favorite, however, is the *maankur*, local to Goa. What makes it special?
Well for one, my grandfather (whose house I am staying at this week on a very
relaxed vacation) has been tending to a large maankur tree in his backyard for
the last couple decades or so, and nothing beats picking mangoes fresh with your
own hands and waiting for them to ripen in your own pantry and then eating them
whichever way you want. For another, the maankur is in my opinion richer and
more wholesome than the hapus: if the hapus is the diva who won't have a single
picture taken without first putting on a pound of makeup, then the maankur is
the beautiful bright-eyed village lass who's too confident to worry about the
pimple on her left cheek. If the hapus is sweet as in sugar then the maankur is
sweet as in nectar. If the hapus is a light hug then the maankur is a
full-bodied embrace.

But the Goa maankur is to me much more than a mango. In a way it embodies my
grandfather's house and simple lifestyle, in a small town in Goa, not worrying
about trivial matters such as Internet connections and automobiles, in which
background my dad grew up and then moved across the vast seas to America. (At
the moment the two of them are investigating whether the roof of the house that
has been battered over the summer by mangoes and coconuts falling from the trees
above will stand up to the impending monsoon rain.) It represents what used to
be my annual summer vacation, hanging out with my cousins and enjoying the
delicious cooking of a plethora of aunts and grandmothers. It's a wholly
different world and culture from that falling-apart brick building in Cambridge
where I now live, and I realize that apart from me, the two have nothing in
common at all&hellip; I guess there's a blog post now.
